The Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy
1978
Preface
The authority of Scripture is a key issue for the Christian Church in this and every age.
Those who profess faith in Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior are called to show the reality
of their discipleship by humbly and faithfully obeying God's written Word. To stray from
Scripture in faith or conduct is disloyalty to our Master. Recognition of the total truth and
trustworthiness of Holy Scripture is essential to a full grasp and adequate confession of
its authority.
The following Statement affirms this inerrancy of Scripture afresh, making clear our
understanding of it and warning against its denial. We are persuaded that to deny it is to
set aside the witness of Jesus Christ and of the Holy Spirit and to refuse that submission
to the claims of God's own Word which marks true Christian faith. We see it as our
timely duty to make this affirmation in the face of current lapses from the truth of
inerrancy among our fellow Christians and misunderstanding of this doctrine in the world
at large.
This Statement consists of three parts: a Summary Statement, Articles of Affirmation and
Denial, and an accompanying Exposition*. It has been prepared in the course of a three-
day consultation in Chicago. Those who have signed the Summary Statement and the
Articles wish to affirm their own conviction as to the inerrancy of Scripture and to
encourage and challenge one another and all Christians to growing appreciation and
understanding of this doctrine. We acknowledge the limitations of a document prepared
in a brief, intensive conference and do not propose that this Statement be given creedal
weight. Yet we rejoice in the deepening of our own convictions through our discussions
together, and we pray that the Statement we have signed may be used to the glory of our
God toward a new reformation of the Church in its faith, life, and mission.
We offer this Statement in a spirit, not of contention, but of humility and love, which we
purpose by God's grace to maintain in any future dialogue arising out of what we have
said. We gladly acknowledge that many who deny the inerrancy of Scripture do not
display the consequences of this denial in the rest of their belief and behavior, and we are
conscious that we who confess this doctrine often deny it in life by failing to bring our
thoughts and deeds, our traditions and habits, into true subjection to the divine Word.
We invite response to this statement from any who see reason to amend its affirmations
about Scripture by the light of Scripture itself, under whose infallible authority we stand
as we speak. We claim no personal infallibility for the witness we bear, and for any help
which enables us to strengthen this testimony to God's Word we shall be grateful.
* The Exposition is not printed here but can be obtained by contacting: ICBI / P.O. Box
13261 / Oakland, CA 94661 / (415)-339-1064.
A SHORT STATEMENT
1. God, who is Himself Truth and speaks truth only, has inspired Holy Scripture in order
thereby to reveal Himself to lost mankind through Jesus Christ as Creator and Lord,
Redeemer and Judge. Holy Scripture is God's witness to Himself.
2. Holy Scripture, being God's own Word, written by men prepared and superintended by
His Spirit, is of infallible divine authority in all matters upon which it touches: it is to be
believed, as God's instruction, in all that it affirms, obeyed, as God's command, in all that
it requires; embraced, as God's pledge, in all that it promises.
3. The Holy Spirit, Scripture's divine Author, both authenticates it to us by His inward
witness and opens our minds to understand its meaning.
4. Being wholly and verbally God-given, Scripture is without error or fault in all its
teaching, no less in what it states about God's acts in creation, about the events of world
history, and about its own literary origins under God, than in its witness to God's saving
grace in individual lives.
5. The authority of Scripture is inescapably impaired if this total divine inerrancy is in
any way limited or disregarded, or made relative to a view of truth contrary to the Bible's
own; and such lapses bring serious loss to both the individual and the Church.
ARTICLES OF AFFIRMATION AND DENIAL
Article I
We affirm that the Holy Scriptures are to be received as the authoritative Word of God.
We deny that the Scriptures receive their authority from the Church, tradition, or any
other human source.
Article II
We affirm that the Scriptures are the supreme written norm by which God binds the
conscience, and that the authority of the Church is subordinate to that of Scripture.
We deny that Church creeds, councils, or declarations have authority greater than or
equal to the authority of the Bible.
Article III
We affirm that the written Word in its entirety is revelation given by God.
We deny that the Bible is merely a witness to revelation, or only becomes revelation in
encounter, or depends on the responses of men for its validity.
Article IV
We affirm that God who made mankind in His image has used language as a means of
revelation.
We deny that human language is so limited by our creatureliness that it is rendered
inadequate as a vehicle for divine revelation. We further deny that the corruption of
human culture and language through sin has thwarted God's work of inspiration.
Article V
We affirm that God' s revelation in the Holy Scriptures was progressive.
We deny that later revelation, which may fulfill earlier revelation, ever corrects or
contradicts it. We further deny that any normative revelation has been given since the
completion of the New Testament writings.
Article VI
We affirm that the whole of Scripture and all its parts, down to the very words of the
original, were given by divine inspiration.
We deny that the inspiration of Scripture can rightly be affirmed of the whole without the
parts, or of some parts but not the whole.
Article VII
We affirm that inspiration was the work in which God by His Spirit, through human
writers, gave us His Word. The origin of Scripture is divine. The mode of divine
inspiration remains largely a mystery to us.
We deny that inspiration can be reduced to human insight, or to heightened states of
consciousness of any kind.
Article VIII
We affirm that God in His Work of inspiration utilized the distinctive personalities and
literary styles of the writers whom He had chosen and prepared.
We deny that God, in causing these writers to use the very words that He chose, overrode
their personalities.
Article IX
We affirm that inspiration, though not conferring omniscience, guaranteed true and
trustworthy utterance on all matters of which the Biblical authors were moved to speak
and write.
We deny that the finitude or fallenness of these writers, by necessity or otherwise,
introduced distortion or falsehood into God's Word.
Article X
We affirm that inspiration, strictly speaking, applies only to the autographic text of
Scripture, which in the providence of God can be ascertained from available manuscripts
with great accuracy. We further affirm that copies and translations of Scripture are the
Word of God to the extent that they faithfully represent the original.
We deny that any essential element of the Christian faith is affected by the absence of the
autographs. We further deny that this absence renders the assertion of Biblical inerrancy
invalid or irrelevant.
Article XI
We affirm that Scripture, having been given by divine inspiration, is infallible, so that, far
from misleading us, it is true and reliable in all the matters it addresses.
We deny that it is possible for the Bible to be at the same time infallible and errant in its
assertions. Infallibility and inerrancy may be distinguished, but not separated.
Article XII
We affirm that Scripture in its entirety is inerrant, being free from all falsehood, fraud, or
deceit.
We deny that Biblical infallibility and inerrancy are limited to spiritual, religious, or
redemptive themes, exclusive of assertions in the fields of history and science. We further
deny that scientific hypotheses about earth history may properly be used to overturn the
teaching of Scripture on creation and the flood.
Article XIII
We affirm the propriety of using inerrancy as a theological term with reference to the
complete truthfulness of Scripture.
We deny that it is proper to evaluate Scripture according to standards of truth and error
that are alien to its usage or purpose. We further deny that inerrancy is negated by
Biblical phenomena such as a lack of modern technical precision, irregularities of
grammar or spelling, observational descriptions of nature, the reporting of falsehoods, the
use of hyperbole and round numbers, the topical arrangement of material, variant
selections of material in parallel accounts, or the use of free citations.
Article XIV
We affirm the unity and internal consistency of Scripture.
We deny that alleged errors and discrepancies that have not yet been resolved vitiate the
truth claims of the Bible.
Article XV
We affirm that the doctrine of inerrancy is grounded in the teaching of the Bible about
inspiration.
We deny that Jesus' teaching about Scripture may be dismissed by appeals to
accommodation or to any natural limitation of His humanity.
Article XVI
We affirm that the doctrine of inerrancy has been integral to the Church's faith
throughout its history.
We deny that inerrancy is a doctrine invented by Scholastic Protestantism, or is a
reactionary position postulated in response to negative higher criticism.
Article XVII
We affirm that the Holy Spirit bears witness to the Scriptures, assuring believers of the
truthfulness of God's written Word.
We deny that this witness of the Holy Spirit operates in isolation from or against
Scripture.
Article XVIII
We affirm that the text of Scripture is to be interpreted by grammatico-historicaI
exegesis, taking account of its literary forms and devices, and that Scripture is to interpret
Scripture.
We deny the legitimacy of any treatment of the text or quest for sources lying behind it
that leads to relativizing, dehistoricizlng, or discounting its teaching, or rejecting its
claims to authorship.
Article XIX
We affirm that a confession of the full authority, infallibility, and inerrancy of Scripture
is vital to a sound understanding of the whole of the Christian faith. We further affirm
that such confession should lead to increasing conformity to the image of Christ.
We deny that such confession is necessary for salvation. However, we further deny that
inerrancy can be rejected without grave consequences both to the individual and to the
Church.